how should we act when people around us
are panicking and how can we avoid
panicking ourselves panic gets us
nowhere
as it is a state of emotional turmoil
during which our rationality is thrown
overboard so when we're faced with a
wide variety of opinions the strong
language of influencers and decisions
based on fear and greed it can be
difficult to find a direction and
maintain course
but during times of mass hysteria it's
essential to use our capacity for
rationality from a stoic point of view
our decisions should be based on facts
and logic and our actions have to be in
the interest of the common good in times
of hardship it's not an unnecessary
exercise to fortify our minds with
philosophical ideas so we don't slip
into the trap of panic Roman Emperor and
stoic philosopher Marcus Aurelius had
some valuable insights on how to
strengthen the mind so we don't deviate
from the right path now let's start with
the second question as it paves the way
to answering the first one how can we
avoid panicking ourselves to navigate
our minds back into tranquillity it is
important to become aware of the nature
of what we are panicking about and also
the reasons why we panic in his
meditations Marcus Aurelius mentions
that no matter what happens it is
something that has happened before when
we are ruled by the issues of the day we
lose sight of the bigger picture
so what unfolds in a moment may seem
totally new and alien in a way this is
true because nothing that happens now
takes place in the past however when we
look at historical accounts we see that
they are filled with the same old same
old Marcus Aurelius shifts the paradigm
by pointing out that life is simply
history repeating itself so we could say
that we experience the same archetypal
storylines over and over again just with
different characters and in different
formats lost all your money your job
millions of people are going through
same thing as we speak and have been in
the past is the world ravaged by the
plague
we had the Spanish flu the Black Death
SARS MERS humanity has gone through many
different crises individual people have
faced a lot of hardship in their lives
there have been good times and bad times
and we have gone through peace and war
history taught us that this mechanism
never changes as long as we exist it is
simply life manifesting the same
patterns everything is transient like
yin and yang so why do we panic when
it's just another manifestation of the
same probably because the thing we panic
about disguised itself as something
unprecedented it triggers our fear of
the unknown while in reality it has
happened many times before what's new
and scary now will be old and familiar
tomorrow that's because we are adaptable
creatures who can change along with the
transient nature of the universe so to
keep a cool hat when things around us
start to change quickly we might want to
repeat the following quote by Marcus
Aurelius no matter what happens keep
this in mind it's the same old thing
from one end of the world to the other
it fills the history books ancient and
modern and the cities and the houses too
nothing new at all familiar transient
and quote all comes down to seeing
things as they are as much as possible
and doing the right thing based on
rationality and not based on fear thus
in a crisis we ought to prepare but not
overdo it especially when it undermines
the community Marcus Aurelius emphasizes
repeatedly that we should work together
and act conformably to our own nature
and the nature of the whole or as he
puts it to do what the community needs
done when we panic we are often inclined
to act and intelligently and in ways
that only make things worse or overlook
the things that actually need to be done
that's why it's essential to keep calm
in the face of adversity because if we
don't we can screw things up in the case
of a virus outbreak
for example instead of trying to be the
hero of the day it's probably much
better to simply stay at home also we
may want to keep in mind that the media
are companies motivated by profit so
they recreate an inflate reality by
constantly focusing on certain topics
that attract attention when we expose
ourselves to the media all day we become
deluded because we start to believe that
there's nothing else going on in the
world besides disaster and this is not
true so instead it's better to focus on
our direct environment something that we
can actually influence and see how we
can do something beneficial thus don't
try to change the things you cannot
change
instead give your grandmother a call now
when it comes to dealing with panicking
people staying calm in the herd is much
easier when our own faculties are strong
if we are determined and don't let
ourselves be carried away by our
irrational thoughts and emotions we
become towers of strength that are
immune to all compulsion like for
example the cravings for toilet paper
even when world leaders act irrationally
and the things they say don't make any
sense or when hostility and violence
dominate the street and people scream
bloody murder Marcus Aurelius which
probably advised us to not engage and to
calmly do what the situation asks of us
I quote let them scream whatever they
want let animals dismember this soft
flesh that covers you how would any of
that stop you from keeping your mind
call reliably sizing up what's around
you and ready to make good use of
whatever happens end quote at the end of
the day but people around us are doing
is not up to us if they feel that panic
is the answer we can only change their
minds if they are open to alternatives
but when they aren't
we'll only waste time trying in such
cases we are better off preventing
ourselves to go along with their panic
so we maintain our inner peace I quote
the tranquility that comes when you stop
caring what they say or think or do only
what you do not to be distracted by
their darkness to run straight for the
finish line
unswerving thank you for watching and be
kind to each other
[Music]
you